docs/source/examples.rst, before:

Examples
========

In the following we provide some examples that demonstrate the use of
potentials, the background equations, computation of the comoving Hubble
horizon, the slow-roll approximation of the primordial power spectrum, and
finally the fully numeric primordial power spectrum making use of the
:mod:`pyoscode` package to solve the oscillatory ODE.

Importing routines used for all examples:

.. plot:: :context:

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    from primpy.parameters import K_STAR
    import primpy.potentials as pp
    from primpy.events import UntilNEvent, InflationEvent, CollapseEvent
    from primpy.initialconditions import InflationStartIC, ISIC_Nt
    from primpy.time.inflation import InflationEquationsT as InflationEquations
    from primpy.solver import solve
    from primpy.oscode_solver import solve_oscode


Potentials
----------

There are various large, single, scalar field inflation models implemented in
:mod:`primpy.potentials`. The following plot gives an overview:

.. plot:: :context:

    phi_range = np.linspace(-3, 13, 100)

    mn2 = pp.QuadraticPotential(Lambda=(2/10**2)**(1/4))
    mn4 = pp.QuarticPotential(Lambda=1/10)
    nat = pp.NaturalPotential(Lambda=1, phi0=10)
    dw2 = pp.DoubleWell2Potential(Lambda=1, phi0=10)
    dw4 = pp.DoubleWell4Potential(Lambda=1, phi0=10)
    stb = pp.StarobinskyPotential(Lambda=1)

    fig, ax = plt.subplots()
    ax.plot(phi_range, mn4.V(phi=phi_range), c=plt.cm.tab20(1), label="Quartic")
    ax.plot(phi_range, mn2.V(phi=phi_range), c=plt.cm.tab20(0), label="Quadratic")
    ax.plot(phi_range, nat.V(phi=phi_range), c=plt.cm.tab20(2), label=nat.tex)
    ax.plot(phi_range, dw2.V(phi=phi_range), c=plt.cm.tab20(8), label=dw2.tex)
    ax.plot(phi_range, dw4.V(phi=phi_range), c=plt.cm.tab20(4), label=dw4.tex)
    ax.plot(phi_range, stb.V(phi=phi_range), c=plt.cm.tab20(6), label=stb.tex)
    ax.set_ylim(-0.05, 1.55)
    ax.set_yticks([])
    ax.set_xticks([0, 10])
    ax.set_xticklabels([0, "$\phi_0$"])
    ax.set_xlabel("$\phi$")
    ax.set_ylabel("$V(\phi)$")
    ax.legend(bbox_to_anchor=(1, 0.5), loc='center left', labelcolor='linecolor',
              handlelength=0, markerscale=0);
    fig.tight_layout()


Background equations
--------------------

Setup:
Let's compute the inflationary background equations in flat space (`K=0`) for
the Starobinsky potential with the following additional parameter setup:

.. plot:: :context: close-figs

    t_eval = np.logspace(5, 8, 2000)
    K = 0            # flat universe
    N_star = 50      # number of e-folds of inflation after horizon crossing
    N_tot = 60       # total number of e-folds of inflation
    N_end = 70       # end time/size after inflation, arbitrary in flat universe
    delta_N_reh = 2  # extra e-folds after end of inflation to see reheating oscillations
    A_s = 2e-9       # amplitude of primordial power spectrum at pivot scale
    Pot = pp.StarobinskyPotential


We compute the background equations keeping track of the start and the end of
inflation and ending the ODE integration once a given number of e-folds has
been reached. We set the initial conditions at the start of inflation and
integrate both forwards and backwards in time.

.. plot:: :context: close-figs

    Lambda, phi_star, N_star = Pot.sr_As2Lambda(A_s=A_s, N_star=N_star, phi_star=None) # crude slow-roll estimate
    pot = Pot(Lambda=Lambda)
    eq = InflationEquations(K=K, potential=pot, track_eta=False)
    ev = [UntilNEvent(eq, value=N_end+delta_N_reh),  # decides stopping criterion
          InflationEvent(eq, +1, terminal=False),    # records inflation start
          InflationEvent(eq, -1, terminal=False)]    # records inflation end

    # from inflation start forwards in time, optimising to get `N_tot` e-folds of inflation
    ic_fore = ISIC_Nt(equations=eq, N_tot=N_tot, N_i=N_end-N_tot, phi_i_bracket=[phi_star-3, phi_star+3], t_i=t_eval[0])
    forewards = solve(ic=ic_fore, events=ev, t_eval=t_eval)
    # from inflation start backwards in time
    ic_back = InflationStartIC(equations=eq, phi_i=ic_fore.phi_i, N_i=ic_fore.N_i, t_i=t_eval[0], x_end=1)
    backwards = solve(ic=ic_back, events=ev)
    # need to shift time, since we initially did not know the precise starting time of inflation
    backwards_t = (backwards.t - backwards.t.min())
    forewards_t = (forewards.t - backwards.t.min())


Plot of some background variables in reduced Planck units. The inflaton field
:math:`\phi`, its first time derivative :math:`\dot\phi`, the
equation-of-state parameter during inflation :math:`w_\phi`, and the Hubble
parameter :math:`H`:

.. plot:: :context: close-figs

    fig, ax = plt.subplots(4, 2, sharex='col', sharey='row', gridspec_kw={'hspace': 0, 'wspace': 0})

    ax[0, 0].set_xlim(1, 2e7)
    ax[0, 0].set_ylim(-3, 23)
    ax[1, 0].set_ylim(-5e-1, 5e-5)
    ax[3, 0].set_ylim(0.5e-7, 1e-0)

    ax[0, 0].semilogx(backwards_t, backwards.phi, c='r')
    ax[0, 0].semilogx(forewards_t, forewards.phi, c='r')
    ax[1, 0].semilogx(backwards_t, backwards.dphidt, c='r')
    ax[1, 0].semilogx(forewards_t, forewards.dphidt, c='r')
    ax[1, 0].set_yscale('symlog', linthresh=1e-5)
    ax[1, 0].axhspan(-1e-5, 1e-5, color='0.7', alpha=0.3, label="linear scaling")
    ax[1, 0].legend()
    ax[2, 0].semilogx(backwards_t, backwards.w, c='r')
    ax[2, 0].semilogx(forewards_t, forewards.w, c='r')
    ax[2, 0].axhline(-1/3, ls=':', c='0.5', label=r"$\ddot a=0 \Leftrightarrow V(\phi)=\dot\phi$")
    ax[2, 0].text(x=ax[2, 0].get_xlim()[0] * 2, y=-1/3+0.10, s="not inflating", va='bottom')
    ax[2, 0].text(x=ax[2, 0].get_xlim()[0] * 2, y=-1/3-0.12, s="    inflating", va='top')
    ax[3, 0].loglog(backwards_t, backwards.H, c='r')
    ax[3, 0].loglog(forewards_t, forewards.H, c='r')

    ax[0, 1].plot(backwards.N, backwards.phi, c='r')
    ax[0, 1].plot(forewards.N, forewards.phi, c='r')
    ax[1, 1].plot(backwards.N, backwards.dphidt, c='r')
    ax[1, 1].plot(forewards.N, forewards.dphidt, c='r')
    ax[1, 1].set_yscale('symlog', linthresh=1e-5)
    ax[1, 1].axhspan(-1e-5, 1e-5, color='0.7', alpha=0.3, label="linear scaling")
    ax[2, 1].plot(forewards.N, forewards.w, c='r')
    ax[2, 1].plot(backwards.N, backwards.w, c='r')
    ax[2, 1].axhline(-1/3, ls=':', c='0.5', label=r"$\ddot a=0 \Leftrightarrow V(\phi)=\dot\phi$")
    ax[3, 1].semilogy(backwards.N, backwards.H, c='r')
    ax[3, 1].semilogy(forewards.N, forewards.H, c='r')

    ax[0, 0].set_ylabel("$\phi\ /\ m_\mathrm{p}$")
    ax[1, 0].set_ylabel("$\dot\phi\ /\ m_\mathrm{p}^2$")
    ax[2, 0].set_ylabel(r"$w_\phi \equiv p_\phi/\rho_\phi$")
    ax[3, 0].set_ylabel("$H\ /\ m_\mathrm{p}$")
    ax[3, 0].set_xlabel("$t\ /\ t_\mathrm{p}$");
    ax[3, 1].set_xlabel("$N = \ln(a/a_\mathrm{p})$");

    fig.tight_layout()


Comoving Hubble horizon
-----------------------

Compute comoving Hubble horizon from background equations:

.. plot:: :context: close-figs

    forewards.derive_comoving_hubble_horizon(N_star=N_star)
    backwards.derive_comoving_hubble_horizon(N_star=N_star, logaH_star=forewards.logaH_star)


Plot the comoving Hubble horizon which initially increases during kinetic
dominance, decreases during inflation, and eventually increases again during
reheating:

.. plot:: :context: close-figs

    fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 1)

    ax.semilogy(backwards.N, backwards.cHH_Mpc, c='r')
    ax.semilogy(forewards.N, forewards.cHH_Mpc, c='r')
    ax.set_xlabel("$N \equiv \ln(a/\ell_\mathrm{p})$")
    ax.set_ylabel("$a_0 (aH)^{-1}\ /\ \mathrm{Mpc}$")

    ax.axhline(1/K_STAR, ls=':', color='0.5', label="pivot scale $k_\\ast=%g\,\mathrm{Mpc^{-1}}$" % K_STAR)
    ax.axvline(forewards.N_cross, ls='--', color='0.5', label="horizon corssing of the pivot scale")
    ax.text(forewards.N_cross+(forewards.N_end-forewards.N_cross)/2, 1/K_STAR, r"$N_\ast=%g$" % forewards.N_star, ha='center', va='bottom')
    ax.text(forewards.N_beg  +(forewards.N_cross-forewards.N_beg)/2, forewards.cHH_Mpc[0], r"$N_\dagger=%g$" % (forewards.N_tot-forewards.N_star), ha='center', va='bottom')
    ax.annotate("", xy=(forewards.N_cross, 1/K_STAR), xytext=(forewards.N_end, 1/K_STAR), arrowprops=dict(arrowstyle='|-|', mutation_scale=3, shrinkA=0, shrinkB=0))
    ax.annotate("", xy=(forewards.N_beg, forewards.cHH_Mpc[0]), xytext=(forewards.N_cross, forewards.cHH_Mpc[0]), arrowprops=dict(arrowstyle='|-|', mutation_scale=3, shrinkA=0, shrinkB=0))
    ax.legend(loc='lower left')
    fig.tight_layout()


Slow-roll approximation of the primordial power spectrum
--------------------------------------------------------

Compute the slow-roll approximation of the primordial power spectrum from the
background variables:

.. plot:: :context: close-figs

    forewards.derive_approx_power(N_star=N_star)


Estimate of the distance to recombination to get a sense of the CMB observable
range for the primordial power spectrum which depends on the wavenumber
:math:`k` rather than multipole moment :math:`\ell`:

.. plot:: :context: close-figs

    r_ast = 144.4
    theta_ast = 1.041e-2
    D_rec = r_ast / theta_ast


Plot:

.. plot:: :context: close-figs

    fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 1)
    ax.loglog(forewards.k_iMpc, forewards.P_scalar_approx,
              label=("scalar PPS with " +
                     "$A_\\mathrm{s}\\approx%.3g$, " % forewards.A_s +
                     "$n_\\mathrm{s}\\approx%.2g$, " % forewards.n_s +
                     "$n_\\mathrm{run}\\approx%.1g$" % forewards.n_run))
    ax.loglog(forewards.k_iMpc, forewards.P_tensor_approx,
              label="tensor PPS with $r\\approx%.2g$" % (forewards.r))
    ax.axvline(K_STAR, ls=':', color='k',
               label="pivot scale $k_\\ast=%g\,\mathrm{Mpc^{-1}}$" % K_STAR)
    ax.axvspan(2/D_rec, 2500/D_rec, color='0.5', alpha=0.5,
               label="observable range by Planck ($\ell$ from 2 to 2500), \n" +
                     "estimated from $r_\\ast=%g$ and $\\theta_\\ast=%g$" % (r_ast, theta_ast))
    ax.set_ylim(1e-12, 1e-8)
    ax.set_ylabel("$\mathcal{P}(k)$")
    ax.set_xlabel("$k\ /\ \mathrm{Mpc^{-1}}$")
    ax.legend(bbox_to_anchor=(1, 1), loc='lower right')
    fig.tight_layout()


Fully numeric primordial power spectrum
---------------------------------------

Since we set up a flat universe, there is some arbitrariness in the choice of
normalisation of the scale factor :math:`a_0` (in curved universes it would
have a physical meaning as the radius of the Universe). Hence, there is some
extra calibration that needs doing for flat universes:

.. plot:: :context: close-figs

    forewards.a0_Mpc = np.exp(np.mean(forewards.logaH[forewards.inflation_mask] - forewards.logk))
    k_iMpc = np.logspace(-6, 1, 2000)
    k_comoving = k_iMpc * forewards.a0_Mpc

.. warning::
    `primpy` has undergone a lot of revisions to adapt it to curvature. During
    that process the treatment for flat universes has been somewhat neglected.
    The calibration for flat universes will change in the future to try and
    streamline this a bit more, but for now there is more care needed when it
    comes to questions of units and calibration for flat universes.


Compute the primordial power spectrum using :mod:`pyoscode` to solve the
oscillatory ODE.

.. plot:: :context: close-figs

    pps = solve_oscode(background=forewards, k=k_comoving, vacuum=('RST',))


.. plot:: :context: close-figs

    fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 1)
    ax.axvline(K_STAR, ls=':', color='k')
    ax.axvspan(2/D_rec, 2500/D_rec, color='0.5', alpha=0.5)
    ax.loglog(forewards.k_iMpc, forewards.P_scalar_approx, c=plt.cm.tab20(1), label="scalar slow-roll approximation")
    ax.loglog(forewards.k_iMpc, forewards.P_tensor_approx, c=plt.cm.tab20(3), label="tensor slow-roll approximation")
    ax.loglog(pps.k_iMpc, pps.P_s_RST, c=plt.cm.tab20(0), label="numeric scalar PPS")
    ax.loglog(pps.k_iMpc, pps.P_t_RST, c=plt.cm.tab20(2), label="numeric tensor PPS")
    ax.set_xlim(pps.k_iMpc[0], pps.k_iMpc[-1])
    ax.set_ylim(1e-12, 1e-8)
    ax.set_ylabel("$\mathcal{P}(k)$")
    ax.set_xlabel("$k\ /\ \mathrm{Mpc^{-1}}$")
    ax.legend(bbox_to_anchor=(1, 1), loc='lower right', ncol=2)
    fig.tight_layout()

Commit message:

update docs to new calibration setup

docs/source/examples.rst, after:

Examples
========

In the following we provide some examples that demonstrate the use of
potentials, the background equations, computation of the comoving Hubble
horizon, the slow-roll approximation of the primordial power spectrum, and
finally the fully numeric primordial power spectrum making use of the
:mod:`pyoscode` package to solve the oscillatory ODE.

Importing routines used for all examples:

.. plot:: :context:

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    from primpy.parameters import K_STAR
    import primpy.potentials as pp
    from primpy.events import UntilNEvent, InflationEvent, CollapseEvent
    from primpy.initialconditions import InflationStartIC, ISIC_Nt
    from primpy.time.inflation import InflationEquationsT as InflationEquations
    from primpy.solver import solve
    from primpy.oscode_solver import solve_oscode


Potentials
----------

There are various large, single, scalar field inflation models implemented in
:mod:`primpy.potentials`. The following plot gives an overview:

.. plot:: :context:

    phi_range = np.linspace(-3, 13, 100)

    mn2 = pp.QuadraticPotential(Lambda=(2/10**2)**(1/4))
    mn4 = pp.QuarticPotential(Lambda=1/10)
    nat = pp.NaturalPotential(Lambda=1, phi0=10)
    dw2 = pp.DoubleWell2Potential(Lambda=1, phi0=10)
    dw4 = pp.DoubleWell4Potential(Lambda=1, phi0=10)
    stb = pp.StarobinskyPotential(Lambda=1)

    fig, ax = plt.subplots()
    ax.plot(phi_range, mn4.V(phi=phi_range), c=plt.cm.tab20(1), label="Quartic")
    ax.plot(phi_range, mn2.V(phi=phi_range), c=plt.cm.tab20(0), label="Quadratic")
    ax.plot(phi_range, nat.V(phi=phi_range), c=plt.cm.tab20(2), label=nat.tex)
    ax.plot(phi_range, dw2.V(phi=phi_range), c=plt.cm.tab20(8), label=dw2.tex)
    ax.plot(phi_range, dw4.V(phi=phi_range), c=plt.cm.tab20(4), label=dw4.tex)
    ax.plot(phi_range, stb.V(phi=phi_range), c=plt.cm.tab20(6), label=stb.tex)
    ax.set_ylim(-0.05, 1.55)
    ax.set_yticks([])
    ax.set_xticks([0, 10])
    ax.set_xticklabels([0, "$\phi_0$"])
    ax.set_xlabel("$\phi$")
    ax.set_ylabel("$V(\phi)$")
    ax.legend(bbox_to_anchor=(1, 0.5), loc='center left', labelcolor='linecolor',
              handlelength=0, markerscale=0);
    fig.tight_layout()


Background equations
--------------------

Setup:
Let's compute the inflationary background equations in flat space (`K=0`) for
the Starobinsky potential with the following additional parameter setup:

.. plot:: :context: close-figs

    t_eval = np.logspace(5, 8, 2000)
    K = 0            # flat universe
    N_star = 50      # number of e-folds of inflation after horizon crossing
    N_tot = 60       # total number of e-folds of inflation
    N_end = 70       # end time/size after inflation, arbitrary in flat universe
    delta_N_reh = 2  # extra e-folds after end of inflation to see reheating oscillations
    A_s = 2e-9       # amplitude of primordial power spectrum at pivot scale
    Pot = pp.StarobinskyPotential


We compute the background equations keeping track of the start and the end of
inflation and ending the ODE integration once a given number of e-folds has
been reached. We set the initial conditions at the start of inflation and
integrate both forwards and backwards in time. We finish by calibrating the
scale factor for a flat universe (such that :math:`a_0=1`), which comes down to
shifting the number of e-folds :math:`N` by a constant.

.. plot:: :context: close-figs

    Lambda, phi_star, N_star = Pot.sr_As2Lambda(A_s=A_s, N_star=N_star, phi_star=None) # crude slow-roll estimate
    pot = Pot(Lambda=Lambda)
    eq = InflationEquations(K=K, potential=pot, track_eta=False)
    ev = [UntilNEvent(eq, value=N_end+delta_N_reh),  # decides stopping criterion
          InflationEvent(eq, +1, terminal=False),    # records inflation start
          InflationEvent(eq, -1, terminal=False)]    # records inflation end

    # from inflation start forwards in time, optimising to get `N_tot` e-folds of inflation
    ic_fore = ISIC_Nt(equations=eq, N_tot=N_tot, N_i=N_end-N_tot, phi_i_bracket=[phi_star-3, phi_star+3], t_i=t_eval[0])
    forewards = solve(ic=ic_fore, events=ev, t_eval=t_eval)
    # from inflation start backwards in time
    ic_back = InflationStartIC(equations=eq, phi_i=ic_fore.phi_i, N_i=ic_fore.N_i, t_i=t_eval[0], x_end=1)
    backwards = solve(ic=ic_back, events=ev)
    # need to shift time, since we initially did not know the precise starting time of inflation
    backwards_t = (backwards.t - backwards.t.min())
    forewards_t = (forewards.t - backwards.t.min())
    # calibrate the scale factor by providing the number `N_star` of e-folds of inflation after horizon crossing of the pivot scale
    forewards.calibrate_scale_factor(N_star=N_star)
    backwards.calibrate_scale_factor(N_star=N_star, background=forewards)


Plot of some background variables in reduced Planck units. The inflaton field
:math:`\phi`, its first time derivative :math:`\dot\phi`, the
equation-of-state parameter during inflation :math:`w_\phi`, and the Hubble
parameter :math:`H`:

.. plot:: :context: close-figs

    fig, ax = plt.subplots(4, 2, sharex='col', sharey='row', gridspec_kw={'hspace': 0, 'wspace': 0})

    ax[0, 0].set_xlim(1, 2e7)
    ax[0, 0].set_ylim(-3, 23)
    ax[1, 0].set_ylim(-5e-1, 5e-5)
    ax[3, 0].set_ylim(0.5e-7, 1e-0)

    ax[0, 0].semilogx(backwards_t, backwards.phi, c='r')
    ax[0, 0].semilogx(forewards_t, forewards.phi, c='r')
    ax[1, 0].semilogx(backwards_t, backwards.dphidt, c='r')
    ax[1, 0].semilogx(forewards_t, forewards.dphidt, c='r')
    ax[1, 0].set_yscale('symlog', linthresh=1e-5)
    ax[1, 0].axhspan(-1e-5, 1e-5, color='0.7', alpha=0.3, label="linear scaling")
    ax[1, 0].legend()
    ax[2, 0].semilogx(backwards_t, backwards.w, c='r')
    ax[2, 0].semilogx(forewards_t, forewards.w, c='r')
    ax[2, 0].axhline(-1/3, ls=':', c='0.5', label=r"$\ddot a=0 \Leftrightarrow V(\phi)=\dot\phi$")
    ax[2, 0].text(x=ax[2, 0].get_xlim()[0] * 2, y=-1/3+0.10, s="not inflating", va='bottom')
    ax[2, 0].text(x=ax[2, 0].get_xlim()[0] * 2, y=-1/3-0.12, s="    inflating", va='top')
    ax[3, 0].loglog(backwards_t, backwards.H, c='r')
    ax[3, 0].loglog(forewards_t, forewards.H, c='r')

    ax[0, 1].plot(backwards.N, backwards.phi, c='r')
    ax[0, 1].plot(forewards.N, forewards.phi, c='r')
    ax[1, 1].plot(backwards.N, backwards.dphidt, c='r')
    ax[1, 1].plot(forewards.N, forewards.dphidt, c='r')
    ax[1, 1].set_yscale('symlog', linthresh=1e-5)
    ax[1, 1].axhspan(-1e-5, 1e-5, color='0.7', alpha=0.3, label="linear scaling")
    ax[2, 1].plot(forewards.N, forewards.w, c='r')
    ax[2, 1].plot(backwards.N, backwards.w, c='r')
    ax[2, 1].axhline(-1/3, ls=':', c='0.5', label=r"$\ddot a=0 \Leftrightarrow V(\phi)=\dot\phi$")
    ax[3, 1].semilogy(backwards.N, backwards.H, c='r')
    ax[3, 1].semilogy(forewards.N, forewards.H, c='r')

    ax[0, 0].set_ylabel("$\phi\ /\ m_\mathrm{p}$")
    ax[1, 0].set_ylabel("$\dot\phi\ /\ m_\mathrm{p}^2$")
    ax[2, 0].set_ylabel(r"$w_\phi \equiv p_\phi/\rho_\phi$")
    ax[3, 0].set_ylabel("$H\ /\ m_\mathrm{p}$")
    ax[3, 0].set_xlabel("$t\ /\ t_\mathrm{p}$");
    ax[3, 1].set_xlabel("$N = \ln(a/a_\mathrm{p})$");

    fig.tight_layout()


Comoving Hubble horizon
-----------------------

Plot the comoving Hubble horizon which initially increases during kinetic
dominance, decreases during inflation, and eventually increases again during
reheating:

.. plot:: :context: close-figs

    fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 1)

    ax.semilogy(backwards.N, backwards.cHH_Mpc, c='r')
    ax.semilogy(forewards.N, forewards.cHH_Mpc, c='r')
    ax.set_xlabel("$N \equiv \ln(a/\ell_\mathrm{p})$")
    ax.set_ylabel("$a_0 (aH)^{-1}\ /\ \mathrm{Mpc}$")

    ax.axhline(1/K_STAR, ls=':', color='0.5', label="pivot scale $k_\\ast=%g\,\mathrm{Mpc^{-1}}$" % K_STAR)
    ax.axvline(forewards.N_cross, ls='--', color='0.5', label="horizon corssing of the pivot scale")
    ax.text(forewards.N_cross+(forewards.N_end-forewards.N_cross)/2, 1/K_STAR, r"$N_\ast=%g$" % forewards.N_star, ha='center', va='bottom')
    ax.text(forewards.N_beg  +(forewards.N_cross-forewards.N_beg)/2, forewards.cHH_Mpc[0], r"$N_\dagger=%g$" % (forewards.N_tot-forewards.N_star), ha='center', va='bottom')
    ax.annotate("", xy=(forewards.N_cross, 1/K_STAR), xytext=(forewards.N_end, 1/K_STAR), arrowprops=dict(arrowstyle='|-|', mutation_scale=3, shrinkA=0, shrinkB=0))
    ax.annotate("", xy=(forewards.N_beg, forewards.cHH_Mpc[0]), xytext=(forewards.N_cross, forewards.cHH_Mpc[0]), arrowprops=dict(arrowstyle='|-|', mutation_scale=3, shrinkA=0, shrinkB=0))
    ax.legend(loc='lower left')
    fig.tight_layout()


Slow-roll approximation of the primordial power spectrum
--------------------------------------------------------

Estimate of the distance to recombination to get a sense of the CMB observable
range for the primordial power spectrum which depends on the wavenumber
:math:`k` rather than multipole moment :math:`\ell`:

.. plot:: :context: close-figs

    r_ast = 144.4
    theta_ast = 1.041e-2
    D_rec = r_ast / theta_ast


Plot:

.. plot:: :context: close-figs

    fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 1)
    ax.loglog(forewards.k_iMpc, forewards.P_scalar_approx,
              label=("scalar PPS with " +
                     "$A_\\mathrm{s}\\approx%.3g$, " % forewards.A_s +
                     "$n_\\mathrm{s}\\approx%.2g$, " % forewards.n_s +
                     "$n_\\mathrm{run}\\approx%.1g$" % forewards.n_run))
    ax.loglog(forewards.k_iMpc, forewards.P_tensor_approx,
              label="tensor PPS with $r\\approx%.2g$" % (forewards.r))
    ax.axvline(K_STAR, ls=':', color='k',
               label="pivot scale $k_\\ast=%g\,\mathrm{Mpc^{-1}}$" % K_STAR)
    ax.axvspan(2/D_rec, 2500/D_rec, color='0.5', alpha=0.5,
               label="observable range by Planck ($\ell$ from 2 to 2500), \n" +
                     "estimated from $r_\\ast=%g$ and $\\theta_\\ast=%g$" % (r_ast, theta_ast))
    ax.set_ylim(1e-12, 1e-8)
    ax.set_ylabel("$\mathcal{P}(k)$")
    ax.set_xlabel("$k\ /\ \mathrm{Mpc^{-1}}$")
    ax.legend(bbox_to_anchor=(1, 1), loc='lower right')
    fig.tight_layout()


Fully numeric primordial power spectrum
---------------------------------------

Since we set up a flat universe, there is some arbitrariness in the choice of
normalisation of the scale factor :math:`a_0` (in curved universes it would
have a physical meaning as the radius of the Universe). Hence, there is some
extra calibration that needs doing for flat universes:

.. plot:: :context: close-figs

    k_iMpc = np.logspace(-6, 1, 2000)
    k_comoving = k_iMpc * forewards.a0_Mpc


Compute the primordial power spectrum using :mod:`pyoscode` to solve the
oscillatory ODE.

.. plot:: :context: close-figs

    pps = solve_oscode(background=forewards, k=k_comoving, vacuum=('RST',))


.. plot:: :context: close-figs

    fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 1)
    ax.axvline(K_STAR, ls=':', color='k')
    ax.axvspan(2/D_rec, 2500/D_rec, color='0.5', alpha=0.5)
    ax.loglog(forewards.k_iMpc, forewards.P_scalar_approx, c=plt.cm.tab20(1), label="scalar slow-roll approximation")
    ax.loglog(forewards.k_iMpc, forewards.P_tensor_approx, c=plt.cm.tab20(3), label="tensor slow-roll approximation")
    ax.loglog(pps.k_iMpc, pps.P_s_RST, c=plt.cm.tab20(0), label="numeric scalar PPS")
    ax.loglog(pps.k_iMpc, pps.P_t_RST, c=plt.cm.tab20(2), label="numeric tensor PPS")
    ax.set_xlim(pps.k_iMpc[0], pps.k_iMpc[-1])
    ax.set_ylim(1e-12, 1e-8)
    ax.set_ylabel("$\mathcal{P}(k)$")
    ax.set_xlabel("$k\ /\ \mathrm{Mpc^{-1}}$")
    ax.legend(bbox_to_anchor=(1, 1), loc='lower right', ncol=2)
    fig.tight_layout()
